popper solved the so-called problem of
induction
that was the problem of how if
mathematics or logic or pure reason
can be certain of the truth of its
conclusions
it can't by the way but on the
assumption it can
then how does science work to generate
truths about the universe
for us after all it can't be like
mathematics where you just begin with
axioms you are absolutely certain of and
derive
conclusions that you're absolutely
certain of the whole point of science is
to go out into the world and investigate
what is absolutely true on this view
so it is said surely it's a process of
repeated observation and presuming the
more
observations you repeatedly see the more
certain or closer to true or confident
you can become but the problem is how
then can we be justified
in thinking we are close to truth or
closer to truth
with these repeated observations it was
the philosopher david
hume who raised this so-called problem
of induction
in the 18th century and philosophers
still bizarrely
today worry about it that worry being
how can we be justified given our
repeated
set of observations say that the sun has
always risen in the past
that we can conclude it is true to say
it will therefore rise tomorrow i say
it's bizarre
because the problem has been solved and
basically
it's not a problem at all repeated
observations is
not what science is about nor ever has
been about
papa first best addressed this and
solved it
in many places including for example his
first book the logic of scientific
discovery
but the most succinct explanation that
i've found my favorite one
is here in this book objective knowledge
it's right there in chapter one it
refutes inductivism and justificationism
it refutes therefore the modern
incarnations of this kind of inductivist
view of the world
which is called bayesian epistemology or
just bayesianism
that's an old idea rather like
creationism which these days goes by the
repackaged name
intelligent design or you know marxism
which is now repackaged to be called
socialism or even in some moods wokism
it's all the same
similar set of misconceptions just being
repackaged and rebranded
and so here we have inductivism being
called bayesianism
but the problem with inductivism or
bayesianism
is that in science like elsewhere in
fact
we are not actually after justifications
that our
predictions will continue off into the
infinite future
or that they probably will what science
is about
on papa's view are testable theories
but not only that he is keenly
interested in explanations and that word
explanation
comes up again and again in his work
there's a chapter in here titled
the aim of science and in it papa says
explicitly on the first page of that
chapter in fact and i'll quote papa
writes
i suggest that it is the aim of science
to find
satisfactory explanations of whatever
strikes us
as being in need of an explanation by an
explanation
or a causal explanation is meant a set
of statements by which one describes the
state of affairs to be explained
while the others the explanatory
statements form the explanation in the
narrower sense of the word
and so he goes on for an entire chapter
and throughout this book about
explanations
papa was not only about testability
in the fabric of reality david deutsch
sharpens this up still further and
clarifies what popper has said
any crank with a prophecy about how the
world will end
next tuesday has an experimentally
testable
falsifiable theory but that's not enough
that is not popeyrian despite what
prominent scientists and philosophers
say about
papa poppa's philosophy is not primarily
about falsification any more than
einstein's physics is about
the speed of light yes falsification is
an important
element of popper's philosophy and the
speed of light
is a crucial component of einstein's
relativity theories
but to think that is all and everything
is wrong
to think that knowing the fact that the
speed of light is constant
gives you anything like a deep
understanding of special let alone
general relativity
is clearly misconceived so to think
falsification
is all and only what popularian
epistemology reduces to
is approximately the same level of error
it doesn't take
this many pages to say scientific
hypotheses
should be testable or all of these other
books either
what david explains here in the fabric
of reality
is that the entire content of a
scientific theory is
in the explanation not merely the
testable predictions
for example and this is from the fabric
of reality
a random person who claims eating one
kilogram of grass
cures your common cold has a testable
theory
but you should not test it no one should
no one will you can reject it on the
basis it is
explanationless there's no explanation
accompanying
that prediction eat the one kilogram of
grass and your common cold will be cured
for more on that read the book or listen
to my podcast with naval that you can
find here
hence some of the additional work that
david has done
here unlike other popular science books
that you might see behind me
or other popular books about science or
related matters like
religion written by scientists we find
something different in the beginning of
infinity it seems to me
new discoveries being explained it's not
merely a summary
of our existing knowledge even our
existing cutting edge knowledge
as exciting as that all might be but
rather it contains some new
contributions to epistemology how
knowledge works
as i said to david about this when we
spoke
the first time this seems to crop up
actually is in chapter one the reach of
explanations
and there we get the concept of good
explanations good explanations being
actual explanations that account for
what is out there in the world and how
it works
that are hard to vary these hard to vary
explanations now i'm convinced
and most people who hear about it become
convinced over time but i think there's
a lot of people who think well science
isn't it just about testable theories
why isn't testable theories enough
so there was a lot about explanations
even in my first book
yes and some some uh
careful readers pointed out
that i'd never actually explained what
an explanation
is in the fabric of reality in
in fact i i seem to have taken a bit of
a cop-out path
by saying just just saying about
explanations that there isn't any
closed list of attributes that an
explanation must have
and uh that's because it seemed to me
that and i think it does seem to many
people
that that the difference between an
explanation and a prediction
is obvious but to most people
it was quite opaque so i thought about
it and this this
is indeed one of the few things that i
will acknowledge
is kind of a bit of an innovation in
the beginning of infinity i thought
about what what exactly makes the
difference
and i thought of some examples such as
the
explanation of the seasons as opposed to
predicting them
and then i i think that the example that
i like best
although again not everyone does is the
example of the
the conjurer yes where where you go in
and you you go in to see this conjuring
performance
and you see some cups and balls
and the country puts the the the ball
under the cup and after a while you
begin to predict
that the cup where he puts the ball
under
is not going to be the one where it ends
up but that doesn't mean you can explain
what's going on in the trick
yeah so yeah exactly so you you can
predict quite confidently that the ball
isn't there
and there you are it's vindicated he uh
but
that's not what you mean by how is the
trick done
what what you what you mean is
what has happened to bring about the
thing you saw
and so you're not asking for an account
of the thing you saw
even a perfect prediction of the thing
you saw
you're asking about the thing you didn't
see yes
yes and this comes up so often in all
throughout the book really and i think
it's a subtle
point easily missed and of course the
other example that you use and that you
often go to
is this idea of dinosaurs the one thing
that you actually can't observe
is indeed the one thing that you're
invoking as actually existing and
causing the phenomena
that you do observe and i think that and
in all these cases
that unobserved thing is the thing that
you're really interested in it's it's
it's the only reason you're interested
in any kind of prediction at all
yes and now this concept of then
hard to vary where all the parts of the
explanation have some
functional role and this is really what
makes the
explanation a good explanation as
opposed to any arbitrary account that
could be easily varied
mythological accounts and so on magical
accounts
did that come to you did you have that
in mind during
the fabric of reality writing it then or
did it only come later in light of
people saying
you know can you sharpen up what you
mean by explanation
it's the latter i i like i said while i
was writing fabric of reality
i kind of thought that these were uh
rather foolishly i i thought
these were words that had an
uncontroversial meaning
and uh i it didn't occur to me that that
that most people would not have this
meaning in mind
although many people did
so in that sense it wasn't something i
invented
it was something that i realized
needs to have to be elaborated to be
written down more clearly and then i
started to think about well
things that are explanations and things
that aren't explanations
and uh like the ancient myths and so on
and and then i thought with the with
with the conjurer
there are circumstances where the
conjurer did it
is the explanation that the person wants
yes you can you can imagine a person who
believes in magic
and is is sort of slowly coming out
of that state of mind like like james
randy's
family uh when his story when he was a
teenager and when he first
exposed a fake psychic
and and was horrified to find that most
of the people in the audience didn't
want to know the truth yeah right yeah
that happened more than once there was a
famous i don't know if you know the
famous story that he was on australian
television he did the same to the spoon
bender yuri gela
on one of our daytime lunchtime talkback
television shows and the audience was
very upset with him and indeed the host
was as well and stormed off the set
he did the same thing to randy wow
right it's about all this stuff that
you're going to prove you go against a
lady like doris stokes who never harmed
anybody in her whole life and you call
her a charlotte and a fake
you know he said deal about it yes i do
you said that she was a liar you're on
the radio you called her a liar
no and that woman wouldn't lie to
anybody and i don't know whether she's
right or wrong
but she would lie to anybody we're going
for a commercial break and you can piss
off
so there there you have it i mean that
that
anger would happen
i suppose whether or not he revealed how
he did it
it was the fact that he he was revealing
that he did do it
that was the thing that angered them and
that that was the
relevant explanation in context
so it's so that's why i have to say it's
an explanation is hard to vary while
still solving the problem that it
purports to solve
yes which might be different for
different people as well in the same
situation
different for different people in the
same situation
this implies that problems are parochial
which means they are in a time and a
place they don't exist forever
in all places and always often
the highly parochial nature of a problem
situation is very specific
for a certain individual what works for
you
might not work for me medicine's a great
example of this
some treatments work for some people but
not for others even if they are very
similar people
with the same disease but good
explanations
are not just about science science just
happens to be a neat and relatively
clean and easy way to speak about this
whole area of epistemology
it is especially when we consider the
physical sciences
and physics in particular when compared
to so many other areas
because in science in physics it is
highly precise
and rich with actual knowledge and of
course we can do
experiments especially crucial
experiments
we can more easily compare competing
theories
although indeed we rarely have competing
so we can actually notice when there
exists a good explanation
and when it is not but the concept of
good hard to vary
explanations reaches into all areas that
we're interested in
history art morality psychology
meditation practice business economics
philosophy
and of course one's own personal life
it's rather often we lack good
explanations
but this is of course the point we
should be
seeking them happily we can because
problems are soluble and we are all of
us
creative that is our defining
characteristic after all